Docs [Layout code tab]: Content review (#414)
carbon-design-system/carbon-website: src/pages/guidelines/layout/code.mdx

---
label: The grid is the framework for all the visual elements and typography at IBM. It’s fundamental to everything we design.
title: Layout
tabs: ['Overview', 'Code']
---

<AnchorLinks>

<AnchorLink>Under the hood</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Getting started</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>How it works</AnchorLink>
<AnchorLink>Grid modes</AnchorLink>

> <AnchorLink>Incorporating the Shell</AnchorLink>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<AnchorLink>Incorporating the shell</AnchorLink>
```

## Getting started

### With Carbon-components

We provide multiple ways for you to use the grid for the Carbon Design System. By default, the grid code is included when you use `carbon-components`. To get started, you'll need to install this package using `npm`:

```bash
npm install carbon-components --save
```

<br />

Or, if you prefer Yarn:

```bash
yarn add carbon-components
```

<br />

You can include the grid in one of two ways:

```scss
// If you're including all the styles for Carbon
@import 'carbon-components/scss/globals/scss/styles.scss';

// If you're wanting to import the grid
@import 'carbon-components/scss/globals/grid/grid';
```

<br />

To use 16 column variant of the grid, you need to enable the `grid-columns-16` feature flag before including any imports in your Sass files. For example:

```scss
$feature-flags: (
  grid-columns-16: true,
);

// If you're including all the styles for Carbon
@import 'carbon-components/scss/globals/scss/styles.scss';

// If you want to import the grid
@import 'carbon-components/scss/globals/grid/grid';
```

<InlineNotification>

> **Note:** By default, Carbon loads with 12 columns. This will change in v11 and the grid will default to 16 columns. Until then we ask you to enable the feature flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** By default, Carbon loads with 12 columns. In a later release this will change and the grid will default to 16 columns. Until then we ask you to enable the feature flag.
```

</InlineNotification>

### Without Carbon-components

If you'd like to use the grid without including `carbon-components`, we offer the `@carbon/grid` package. You can install this with `npm`:

```bash
npm install @carbon/grid --save
```

<br />

Or, if you prefer Yarn:

```bash
yarn add @carbon/grid
```

<br />

You can then include the 16 column grid by doing the following in your Sass files:

```scss
@import '@carbon/grid/scss/grid';
```

## How it works

> We won't spend a lot of time here recapping the basics of the [Bootstrap grid](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.0/layout/grid/). Instead we'll emphasize the features that make this system unique, especially concerning gutter structure, type alignment and the UI Shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We won't spend a lot of time here recapping the basics of the [Bootstrap grid](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.0/layout/grid/). Instead we'll emphasize the features that make this system unique, especially concerning gutter structure, type alignment, and the UI Shell.
```

          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
        </div>
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 2</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 2</div>
        </div>
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 1</div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
<div class="bx--grid">
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 8</div>
  </div>
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 4</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 4</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 4</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 4</div>
  </div>
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 2</div>
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 2</div>
  </div>
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col">1 of 1</div>
  </div>
</div>
```

  </Column>
</Row>

## Grid modes

> In all, there are 3 different gutter scenarios in our system to allow for different types of content spacing: Comfortable, Cozy and Condensed. The gutters in between columns have a fixed width and do not scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all, there are three different gutter scenarios in our system to allow for different types of content spacing: Comfortable, Cozy and Condensed. The gutters in between columns have a fixed width and do not scale.
```

          <div class="bx-demo--col"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
<div class="bx--grid">
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
  </div>
</div>
```

  </Column>
</Row>

<br />

#### Usage

Use the Comfortable grid mode when you are dealing with separate pieces of information with separate destinations. This grid mode is also good for text-heavy situations, where maximum breathing room helps provide clarity and legibility. Also, basic images (without text on them) always use this grid mode.

<InlineNotification>

**Note:** Fixed components with labels such as input fields and dropdowns must use the Comfortable grid mode. One overarching rule — applicable to each grid mode — is that type never hangs into the gutter. So we don't want to push label type into the gutter in order to get field type to align.

</InlineNotification>

![32px gutter](images/32px_gutter.png)

<Row>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>

>   <DoDontExample type="do" caption="Do align type (outside of a container), components and tiles to the columns.">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <DoDontExample type="do" caption="Do align type (outside of a container), components, and tiles to the columns.">
```

![Do align type (outside of a container), components and tiles to the columns.](images/32px_do.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4} >

>   <DoDontExample caption="Do not take type off of the column structure to achieve alignment.">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <DoDontExample caption="Do not take type off the column structure to achieve alignment.">
```

<Row>
  <Column noGutterSm>
    <div className="grid-demo grid-demo--cozy">
      <div class="bx-demo--grid">
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col bx-demo--no-gutter--left"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col bx-demo--no-gutter--left"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col bx-demo--no-gutter--left"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col bx-demo--no-gutter--left"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
<div class="bx--grid">
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col bx--no-gutter--left"></div>
    <div class="bx--col bx--no-gutter--left"></div>
    <div class="bx--col bx--no-gutter--left"></div>
    <div class="bx--col bx--no-gutter--left"></div>
  </div>
</div>
```

  </Column>
</Row>

<br />

#### Usage

Use the Cozy grid mode when you are dealing with separate pieces of information with separate destinations, but would like to save more real estate. This grid mode will give your compositions a sleeker look and maximize type alignment, within and without containers.

> As mentioned above, fixed components with labels, such a input fields and dropdowns, should not hang into the gutter. See an example of how to incorporate a Comfortable and a Cozy grid scenario in the [Mix and match](#mix-and-match) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, fixed components with labels, such as input fields and dropdowns, should not hang into the gutter. See an example of how to incorporate a Comfortable and a Cozy grid scenario in the [Mix and match](#mix-and-match) section.
```

![16px gutter](images/16px_gutter.png)

<Row>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>
  <DoDontExample type="do" caption="Do align components within containers flush to the columns.">

![Do align components within containers flush to the columns.](images/16px_do.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4} >
  <DoDontExample caption="Do not hang type into the gutter under any circumstances.">

![Do not hang type into the gutter under any circumstances.](images/16px_dont.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
</Row>

### The Condensed grid

> The Condensed grid collapses the gutter to 2px. To achieve this, containers and components bleed 16px into the gutter on either side of the column. This grid mode is most often used in conjunction with another grid mode, either Cozy or Comfortable and arguably requires the most design skill to incorporate into layouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Condensed grid collapses the gutter to 2px. To achieve this, containers and components bleed 16px into the gutter on either side of the column. This grid mode is most often used in conjunction with another grid mode, either Cozy or Comfortable, and arguably requires the most design skill to incorporate into layouts.
```

Rows that are adjacent will have a 2px of margin between them to match gutter. Use vertical helpers here.

<Row>
  <Column noGutterSm>
    <div className="grid-demo grid-demo--condensed">
      <div class="bx-demo--grid bx-demo--grid--condensed">
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col"><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col "><div class="grid-demo-content"></div></div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
<div class="bx--grid bx--grid--condensed">
  <div class="bx--row">
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
    <div class="bx--col"></div>
  </div>
</div>
```

  </Column>
</Row>

<br />

#### Usage

> When you have separate pieces of information that form a larger picture, like a dashboard or an overview page — that’s a good time to use the Condensed grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have separate pieces of information that form a larger picture, like a dashboard or an overview page, that’s a good time to use the Condensed grid.
```

> You'll also see this grid mode in portals, resource tiles and other introductory UI. See it in action on the [IBM Design Language homepage](https://www.ibm.com/design/language/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll also see this grid mode in portals, resource tiles and other introductory UI. See it in action on the [IBM Design Language homepage](https://www.ibm.com/design/language/).
```

#### Usage

Unless you're using the Comfortable grid mode exclusively, mixing and matching is going to be the rule rather than the exception on most platforms — especially since our labeled components (input fields, dropdowns etc.) require a 32px gutter. We've provided a couple of examples below and will keep adding helpful uses cases as we find them.

![32px gutter](images/Mixed_use.png)

<Row>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>
  <DoDontExample type="do" caption="Do apply different grid modes to different components (like input fields with labels and tiles).">

![Do apply different grid modes to different components (like input fields with labels and tiles).](images/Mixed_use_do.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4} >
  <DoDontExample caption="Do not apply different grid modes to the same component on the same page.">

![Do not apply different grid modes to the same component on the same page.](images/Mixed_use_dont.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
</Row>

## Incorporating the Shell

> We cover more about shell behavior on the Layout Overview tab in the [Grid influencers](/guidelines/layout/overview#grid-influencers) section. However, we've had a lot of questions about how the shell works in conjunction with our grid. That's why recently we incorporated the shell into our grid tooling as a Sketch template. We'd also like to show it in action here in a product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We cover more about shell behavior on the Layout Overview tab in the [Grid influencers](/guidelines/layout/overview#grid-influencers) section. However, we've had a lot of questions about how the shell works in conjunction with our grid. That's why we recently incorporated the shell into our grid tooling as a Sketch template. We'd also like to show it in action here in a product.
```

    <div className="grid-demo">
      <div class="demo-shell demo-shell--expanded"></div>
      <div class="bx-demo--grid">
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 8</div>
        </div>
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 4</div>
        </div>
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 2</div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 2</div>
        </div>
        <div class="bx-demo--row">
          <div class="bx-demo--col">1 of 1</div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
what should we show here? the html, the css we added? both?
```

  </Column>
</Row>

<br />

#### Usage

> The most commonly used product shell is the Flexbile panel. The collapsed Flexible Panel expands when the user hovers over any portion of it. When flexible panels expand, they either condense both the content and the grid or they push content beyond the edge of the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most commonly used product shell is the Flexible panel. The collapsed Flexible Panel expands when the user hovers over any portion of it. When flexible panels expand, they either condense both the content and the grid or they push content beyond the edge of the browser.
```

    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-11 bx--col-lg-5">5</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-10 bx--col-lg-6">6</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-9 bx--col-lg-7">7</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-8 bx--col-lg-8">8</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-7 bx--col-lg-9">9</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-6 bx--col-lg-10">10</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-5 bx--col-lg-11">11</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-4 bx--col-lg-12">12</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-3 bx--col-lg-13">13</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-2 bx--col-lg-14">14</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-1 bx--col-lg-15">15</div>
    </div>
    <div class="bx--row">
      <div class="bx--offset-lg-0 bx--col-lg-16">16</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
```

</Column>
</Row>

### Vertical spacing

> We intend to add a demo on vertical spacing soon — along with more guidance and examples around key heights and spacers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We intend to add a demo on vertical spacing soon, along with more guidance and examples around key heights and spacers.
```

            <div class="bx-demo--aspect-ratio bx-demo--aspect-ratio--1x2">
              <div class="bx-demo--aspect-ratio--object">
                <div class="aspect-ratio-content">1:2</div>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <div class="bx-demo--col">
            <div class="bx-demo--aspect-ratio bx-demo--aspect-ratio--1x2">
              <div class="bx-demo--aspect-ratio--object">
                <div class="aspect-ratio-content">1:2</div>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>

```html
<div class="bx--aspect-ratio bx--aspect-ratio--2x1">
  <div class="bx--aspect-ratio--object">2x1</div>
</div>

<div class="bx--aspect-ratio bx--aspect-ratio--16x9">
  <div class="bx--aspect-ratio--object">16:19</div>
</div>

<div class="bx--aspect-ratio bx--aspect-ratio--4x3">
  <div class="bx--aspect-ratio--object">4:3</div>
</div>

<div class="bx--aspect-ratio bx--aspect-ratio--1x1">
  <div class="bx--aspect-ratio--object">1:1</div>
</div>

<div class="bx--aspect-ratio bx--aspect-ratio--1x2">
  <div class="bx--aspect-ratio--object">1:2</div>
</div>
```

  </Column>
</Row>

<br />

> #### Basic Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Basic usage
```

![Aspect ratio](images/Aspect_Ratio.png)

<br />

#### Adaptability

Image size can change ratios when the breakpoint changes.

![Aspect ratio flexible](images/Aspect_Ratio_flexible.png)

<Row>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>
  <DoDontExample type="do" caption="When combining tiles, or tiles and images, do give each a designated aspect ratio.">

![When combining tiles, or tiles and images, do give each a designated aspect ratio.](images/AR_do_1.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4} >
  <DoDontExample caption="Do not shoe-horn each tile / tile and image into a combined aspect ratio.">

![Do not shoe-horn each tile / tile and image into a combined aspect ratio.](images/AR_dont_1.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
</Row>

<Row>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4}>
  <DoDontExample type="do" caption="Do use a designated aspect ratio for a grid of same-size fixed ratio tiles.">

![Do use a designated aspect ratio for a grid of same-size fixed ratio tiles.](images/AR_do_2.png)

  </DoDontExample>
</Column>
<Column colMd={4} colLg={4} >

>   <DoDontExample caption="Don’t start with a random aspect ratio for a grid of same-size fixed ratio tiles.">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <DoDontExample caption="Do not start with a random aspect ratio for a grid of same-size fixed ratio tiles.">
```
